---
layout: post
title: Karl Popper's Philosophy of Science
excerpt: What is science? What distinguishes it from psuedoscience? Philosopher Karl Popper believed that the answer boils down to falsifiability.
modified: 2019-12-17
categories: [philosophy]
comments: true
pinned: true
---

First post! Recently in my philosophy class, we've been learning about Karl Popper and the demarcation problem. I thought it was really interesting and worth sharing. Not to mention I just wrote a paper about this topic, so why not put it on here too.


### What is Science? What is the Scientific Method?
The demarcation problem asks how to distinguish between science and psuedoscience. For example, what makes Einstein's theory of relativity scientific and astrology psuedoscientific? Popper's answer to this question comes in the form of 3 theses. Before I present them, I want to clarify some important terminology.

**Confirmation**: When we say some evidence *x* confirms hypothesis *H*, we don't mean that *H* is guaranteed to be true (by *x* or otherwise); rather we just mean that *x* **supports** hypothesis *H*, so *H* could still be wrong. For example, an observation of a black raven supports the hypothesis that all ravens are black. So by our definition, the observation of a black raven confirms the hypothesis that all ravens are black.<sup>1</sup>

**Falsifiability**: When we say a hypothesis is falsifiable, we mean that there exists some observation which, if observed, would disprove the theory. This is different from saying that the hypothesis is false. For example, consider the hypothesis that all circles are round. To disprove it, we would just need to observe a circle which is not round, so the hypothesis is falsifiable. But obviously circles must be round, so the hypothesis is true (sort of by definition of a circle).

#### Popper's Main Theses
Here I present Popper's 3 main theses in their compact forms. I will elaborate on them more and talk about why they are ultimately unsustainable in the rest of the post.

1. **Confirmation is a Myth**: Confirming instances of some universal generalization such as "All *A*s are *B*s" shouldn't make us any more confident in the generalization.
2. **Falsifiability**: Scientific hypotheses are falsifiable. Psuedoscientific hypotheses are not falsifiable.
3. **Conjecture and Refutation**: (about the scientific process) Scientists behaving scientifically should work to falsify their theories; they should not be looking for ways to make their theories work.

#### Falsifiability
I want to talk about 2. first because I think it's the most interesting one and is a good setup for the rest. Popper uses falsifiability to differentiate between science and psuedoscience, saying a theory is scientific if and only if there exists some observation which would disprove it.

For example, consider Einstein's theory of general relativity which most people would consider scientific. Einstein's theory predicts very specifically how light would bend around a massive body. This is easy to disprove; all we would have to do is devise some experiment to observe the curvature of the rays of light passing close to nearby planets. If the rays don't bend exactly how Einstein said they would, then we may consider his theory disproven. On the other hand, consider something like astrology which most people would consider psuedoscience. Astrology tends to make vague predictions such as "you will be happy today" which are hard, if not impossible, to disprove. For example even if the day was generally bad, surely there was a thing or two which wasn't as bad relatively, so I guess the prediction was basically right. It's hard to devise some observation which would disprove the prediction, since it doesn't really state anything specific will happen.

This is what Popper thought was the heart of the answer to science vs psuedoscience. A scientific theory will make specific, precise predictions and will "stick its neck out" with its predictions (falsifiable), while psuedoscientific theories don't really take any risk of being disproven.

#### Confirmation is a Myth
Popper, as well as many other philosophers, believed that we could never be 100% sure that a theory is true.<sup>2</sup> This seems like a reasonable belief to hold, since for example, Newton's theory of gravity is well "supported" by everyday observations and was widely accepted for a long time, yet eventually it was shown to be false.

Popper takes it a step further through *confirmation is a myth*. His thesis 1. says that not only can we never be absolutely certain of a theory, we can never even be more confident in a theory. This means that seeing a black raven should not make us more willing to believe that all ravens are black. One way to justify this view is as follows. Science mostly deals with generalizations of the form all "*A*s are *B*s" where there are infinite *A*s. So, even if we observe millions of *A*s which are *B*s, there are still infinite *A*s which are potentially not *B*s. It then seems to make sense that we shouldn't actually be any more confident that all *A*s are *B*s. Hence, to Popper, there are only two states of mind:
* A theory has been disproven, so we know it is false.
* A theory has not been disproven, so we don't know if it is true or false, and we have no reason to lean in either direction.
In my opinion, this part of Popper's beliefs is hard to come to terms with, but it's certainly a fun idea to think about.<sup>3</sup>

#### Conjecture and Refutation (the scientific process)
Popper believed the scientific process should follow the following steps.
1. A theory is proposed.
2. An observable prediction must be derived from it.
3. We check if the prediction comes to be as the theory says.
    * If it doesn't, then we know the theory is wrong.
    * If it does, then nothing changes. We can't conclude whether the theory is true or false, nor can we be more confident in either direction, and so we repeat from step 2. until the theory is disproven.
An important takeaway is that according to Popper, scientists should always be working to disprove their theories. Astrologists fail in this regard since they aren't usually actively trying to falsify their theories and instead tend to search for data which support their hypotheses.

With this view, it may seem that the scientific process is rather hopeless. After all, science tries to understand the world with its theories, but if we can't believe in any of those theories (confirmation is a myth), then what's the point of science?

Popper thinks of the search for truth like this. Imagine we want to find the holy grail, and around us are infinite grails lying on the ground. The holy grail will shine forever, while all the other grails are also shining but each of them will eventually dim at some point in time which we don't know. We may hold on to one grail at a time. We don't know if it is the holy grail or not; all we can do is wait for it to dim and pick up another grail once it does. We will never know if we are holding the holy grail, and we have no reason to believe that the grail we are currently holding is the holy grail regardless of how long it has been shining.

Popper thought that this is just like how science works. We can try one theory after another until it has been disproven, but just because a theory has not been disproven doesn't mean that we should believe it is true. After all, the theories which we haven't considered yet are equally not disproven, so they are equally likely to be true in some sense.

### Problems with Popper
I think Popper's ideas are great. They're fun to consider, and they paint a clear, simple picture of what science is. But as usual when a philosopher puts forth new and bold ideas, they are bound to have some problems. There are probably a bunch of holes to poke in Popper's theses (this isn't really a diss on Popper, since it tends to be true with all interesting ideas), and I'll just talk about a couple of them that I like.

#### The Bridge Problem
One problem that Popper struggled with is the following hypothetical situation. In the scenario, we want to build a bridge, and we have two scientific theories related to bridge building. One has been used to successfully build numerous bridges, while the other was only invented yesterday, and neither have been disproven (yet). Which scientific theory do we use?

According to Popper, we have no reason to trust in either one more than the other, even though common sense says obviously go with the more successful one. It seems like we have to have a way to decide which theory to believe in; otherwise it'd be pretty difficult to apply any of the science we come up with.

Popper's response to this problem is that we should use the more *corroborated* theory. Popper gave a technical definition of corroboration, but the basic idea is that it has been more successful in the past, even if that doesn't indicate success in the future. Hence, the more previously successful theory is the more corroborated one, but then what is the difference between corroboration and confirmation? The whole point of Popper's arguments is that confirmation is a myth after all. And if corroboration doesn't give any indication of success in the future, then why would we choose the more corroborated theory over the other? To me, this is the biggest problem with Popper's beliefs, and I'm not sure how he could get out of it.

#### Probabilistic Hypotheses
Here's another problem Popper struggled with. Consider the hypothesis that when flipping an evenly weighted coin, there is a 50% chance of heads and 50% chance of tails. This seems like a scientific hypothesis, yet there doesn't seem to be a particular observation that could disprove it (not falsifiable). After all, we don't make any direct claims about the results of flipping a coin; we only make claims about the *probability* of flipping the coin. Even if we flip the coin 100 times and they all come up heads, it is still technically possible for the coin to have the 50-50 probabilistic properties. Popper's arguments seem to then conclude this hypothesis is not scientific, which seems wrong.

Popper replies with the idea of being *practically impossible*. He says that in each field, scientists can determine what is observation is practically impossible according to some theory. In the case of the coins hypothesis, scientists might agree that a million heads in a row is practically impossible, and that observation could disprove the theory. I don't think this is a very good response... How would scientists determine that threshold, and does that threshold even exist?

### Concluding Remarks
Overall, I find Popper's ideas very interesting and fun. I don't think Popper has the full answer to the demarcation problem, but I find his ideas appealing due to their simplicity and the clear picture of science they paint.

Well, that ends this first post. I hope you all enjoyed reading, and see you next time!

##### Footnotes

<sup>1</sup> This relates to the raven's problem, which reveals a contradiction between our inductive reasoning and intuition and is part of why Popper's philosophy is so appealing. I will probably make a post about this topic as well at some point!

<sup>2</sup> This is a viewpoint shared by many philosophers called fallibilism.

<sup>3</sup> Popper's ideas about *confirmation is a myth* are appealing for many reasons. Confirmation brings up several problems such as the raven's problem and the new riddle of induction, which are solved by adopting Popper's viewpoint.